Simulating Qiskit Pulse Schedules with Qiskit Dynamics
======================================================

This tutorial shows how to use Qiskit Dynamics to simulate a Pulse schedule
with a simple model of a qubit. The
qubit is modeled by the drift hamiltonian

.. math::

  H_\text{drift} = \frac{\omega}{2} Z


to which we apply the drive

.. math::

  H_\text{drive}(t) = \frac{r\,\Omega(t)}{2} X

Here, :math:`\Omega(t)` is the drive signal which we will create using
Qiskit pulse. The factor :math:`r` is the strength with which the drive
signal drives the qubit. We begin by creating a pulse schedule with a
``sx`` gate followed by a phase shift on the drive so that the following
pulse creates a ``sy`` rotation. Therefore, if the qubit begins in the
ground state we expect that this second pulse will not have any effect
on the qubit. This situation is simulated with the following steps:

1. Create the pulse schedule
2. Converting pulse schedules to Signals
3. Create the system model, configured to simulate pulse schedules
4. Simulate the pulse schedule using the model

1. Create the pulse schedule
----------------------------

First, we use the pulse module in Qiskit to create a pulse schedule.

.. jupyter-execute::

    import numpy as np
    import qiskit.pulse as pulse

    # Strength of the Rabi-rate in GHz.
    r = 0.1

    # Frequency of the qubit transition in GHz.
    w = 5.

    # Sample rate of the backend in ns.
    dt = 1/4.5

    # Define gaussian envelope function to have a pi rotation.
    amp = 1.
    area = 1
    sig = area*0.399128/r/amp
    T = 4*sig
    duration = int(T / dt)
    beta = 2.0

    # The 1.75 factor is used to approximately get a sx gate.
    # Further "calibration" could be done to refine the pulse amplitude.
    with pulse.build(name="sx-sy schedule") as xp:
        pulse.play(pulse.Drag(duration, amp / 1.75, sig / dt, beta), pulse.DriveChannel(0))
        pulse.shift_phase(np.pi/2, pulse.DriveChannel(0))
        pulse.play(pulse.Drag(duration, amp / 1.75, sig / dt, beta), pulse.DriveChannel(0))

    xp.draw()


2. Convert the pulse schedule to a ``Signal``
---------------------------------------------

Qiskit Dynamics has functionality for converting pulse schedule to instances
of ``Signal``. This is done using the pulse instruction to signal
converter ``InstructionToSignals``. This converter needs to know the
sample rate of the arbitrary waveform generators creating the signals,
i.e. ``dt``, as well as the carrier frequency of the signals,
i.e. ``w``. The plot below shows the envelopes and the signals resulting
from this conversion. The dashed line shows the time at which the
virtual ``Z`` gate is applied.

.. jupyter-execute::

    from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
    from qiskit_dynamics.pulse import InstructionToSignals

    plt.rcParams["font.size"] = 16

    converter = InstructionToSignals(dt, carriers={"d0": w})

    signals = converter.get_signals(xp)
    fig, axs = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(14, 4.5))
    for ax, title in zip(axs, ["envelope", "signal"]):
        signals[0].draw(0, 2*T, 2000, title, axis=ax)
        ax.set_xlabel("Time (ns)")
        ax.set_ylabel("Amplitude")
        ax.set_title(title)
        ax.vlines(T, ax.get_ylim()[0], ax.get_ylim()[1], "k", linestyle="dashed")


3. Create the system model
--------------------------

We now setup a ``Solver`` instance with the desired Hamiltonian information,
and configure it to simulate pulse schedules. This requires specifying
which channels act on which operators, channel carrier frequencies, and sample width ``dt``.
Additionally, we setup this solver in the rotating frame and perform the
rotating wave approximation.

.. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.quantum_info.operators import Operator
    from qiskit_dynamics import Solver

    # construct operators
    X = Operator.from_label('X')
    Z = Operator.from_label('Z')

    drift = 2 * np.pi * w * Z/2
    operators = [2 * np.pi * r * X/2]

    # construct the solver
    hamiltonian_solver = Solver(
        static_hamiltonian=drift,
        hamiltonian_operators=operators,
        rotating_frame=drift,
        rwa_cutoff_freq=2 * 5.0,
        hamiltonian_channels=['d0'],
        channel_carrier_freqs={'d0': w},
        dt=dt
    )

4. Simulate the pulse schedule using the model
----------------------------------------------

In the last step we perform the simulation and plot the results. Note that, as we have
configured ``hamiltonian_solver`` to simulate pulse schedules, we pass the schedule ``xp``
directly to the ``signals`` argument of the ``solve`` method. Equivalently, ``signals``
generated by ``converter.get_signals`` above can also be passed to the ``signals`` argument
and in this case should produce identical behavior.

.. jupyter-execute::

    from qiskit.quantum_info.states import Statevector

    # Start the qubit in its ground state.
    y0 = Statevector([1., 0.])

    %time sol = hamiltonian_solver.solve(t_span=[0., 2*T], y0=y0, signals=xp, atol=1e-8, rtol=1e-8)


.. jupyter-execute::

    def plot_populations(sol):
        pop0 = [psi.probabilities()[0] for psi in sol.y]
        pop1 = [psi.probabilities()[1] for psi in sol.y]

        fig = plt.figure(figsize=(8, 5))
        plt.plot(sol.t, pop0, lw=3, label="Population in |0>")
        plt.plot(sol.t, pop1, lw=3, label="Population in |1>")
        plt.xlabel("Time (ns)")
        plt.ylabel("Population")
        plt.legend(frameon=False)
        plt.ylim([0, 1.05])
        plt.xlim([0, 2*T])
        plt.vlines(T, 0, 1.05, "k", linestyle="dashed")

The plot below shows the population of the qubit as it evolves during
the pulses. The vertical dashed line shows the time of the virtual Z
rotation which was induced by the ``shift_phase`` instruction in the
pulse schedule. As expected, the first pulse moves the qubit to an
eigenstate of the ``Y`` operator. Therefore, the second pulse, which
drives around the ``Y``-axis due to the phase shift, has hardley any
influence on the populations of the qubit.

.. jupyter-execute::

    plot_populations(sol)
